---
title: Takeaways from Codemania 2018
description: 
layout: post
image: codemania_head.png
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: [Events, People, Auckland, Codemania]
---
A one-day conference by actual developers and about actual software development, followed by a collection of sessions and conversations with the speakers from the conference and about 40 or so interested attendees.
<!--more-->

## Day 1: the conference
### Michael Lopp - THE SECOND ACT
The second act is building a culture of people that can build the next product.

The Old Guard (creators of the initial culture) vs the New Guard (the emerging culture):
- Old Guard started small, knew everyone, and talked over everything.
- New Guard is in a structure where there are too many people to involve everyone (or even know them all), formalise process, and write things down.

### Sacha Judd - SUPERFAN!
This talk is well summarised at http://www.sachajudd.com/superfan

### Richard Busby - CONTAINER AUTOMATION, SECURITY, AND MONITORING ON AWS
Recommends a tool for scanning containers for vulnerabilities called Clair - https://github.com/coreos/clair

Amazon ECR (https://aws.amazon.com/ecr/) is useful for hosting a repo of containers for deployment using ECS.

Amazon Parameter Store (https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/systems-manager-paramstore.html) is useful for storing a complex set of configuration variables that can be secured by resource.

### Tammy Butow - HOW TO ESTABLISH AN INCIDENT MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Good blog about it here: https://www.gremlin.com/community/tutorials/how-to-establish-a-high-severity-incident-management-program/
Lingo: Sev's are incidents at particular severity levels (e.g. a Sev 1 happened last night)

4 more common sevs:
- availability drop
- broken feature
- loss of data
- security risk

The basic sev lifecycle: Detection > Diagnosis > Mitigation > Prevention > Closure (included reproduction and response practice)

It's also useful to measure MTBF.

Give sevs a name to socialise them with an easy to discuss handle for humans. (e.g. Sev Grumpy Frog). You could even integrate a name generator that names the sev as it is created.

Coordination: 
-Use a slack channel for sevs to broadcast status.
-Incident Manager On Call (IMOC) is point for incident and handles all comms
-Technical Lead On Call (TLOC) is the fixer for a system(s) that is woken up by the IMOC and is focused on mitigating the sev

### Katie Bell - KUBERNETES: DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS MADE EASY(-IER)
This talk seems to whiz by, and Katie made everything look sooo simple that I didn't take any notes during the talk.

Container + simple yml config > deploy with Kubernetes > multi-nodes with simple roll-out updates behind an LB.

### Patima Tantiprasut - THE ART OF GIVING A DAMN, AND ALSO NOT
A basic human rights checklist for the users of our software:
- Access: Does everyone have an equal opportunity to their data/functionality
- Truth: Is the software misleading, or hiding pertinent info
- Privacy: Does the software protect customer's sensitive info
- Safety: Can the software hurt people to lead them to hurt others
- Agreement: Does the software behave as the customer thought they agreed to.

### Christine Yen - OBSERVABILITY AND THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Instrumentation of the deployed "thing" to give data in a form/language that relate to devs (not just ops).

Tip: Put the release number in the monitoring messages/logs/data so that we can see which version is responsible for which behaviour.

Devops means devs are working more closely with production servers. How is sensitive production data protected from "leaking" into monitoring.

### Rich Campbell - THE MOON: GATEWAY TO THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Awesome talk about using the moon to save the earth is ways I didn't consider.

Listen to hist podcast at https://www.dotnetrocks.com/ and http://www.runasradio.com/


## Day 2/3: Conversations

>A collection of sessions and conversations with the speakers from the conference and about 40 or so interested attendees. The following thoughts come out of that.

Product Managers are not owners of the product delivery, nor the product strategy, but are influencers of both.

In diverse teams "fairness" is differently subjective.

Every team is immutable. Adding or removing a team member makes it a new team with a new culture.
Teams are collections of people with whole lives, some of which are spent at work. Enrich your team by connecting as people. Break down barriers between teams by making friends with individual people on the "other".

In a retro try adding "Share something personal that happened since last time" to "what went well" and "what can we improve". 

To enable privacy (and esp. now with GDPR) always implement your DELETE endpoint(s) from the start.

A central point for feminism in the workplace: Feminist Frequency

Medium has a growth framework for businesses that includes skills and levels and capabilities: https://medium.com/s/engineering-growth-framework

Writing: Grammerly.com is useful as a copy editor

Books/Blogs to read:
- https://medium.com/make-meaningful-work
- Facilitator's guide to participatory decision-making
- Writing down the bones, Natalie Goldberg
- Fearless Change - patterns for introducing new ideas
- Peopleware, de Marco & Lister
- Managing Humans, Michael Lopp
- Leadership and Self-Deception
